I'm here with Kate Oliver and Andy Collins
from the Faculty of Functional Nanomaterials at the University of Bristol
and they are going to show me how we see very, very, very small things.
KATE: So, we are nanotechnologists, and for us an atom is a small thing.
TOM: I agree, okay.
So, we look at atoms in our way
called 'scanning tunneling microscope'.
and it uses the fact that, if you bring a point close enough to a surface,
then there is a chance that due to quantum -
TOM: I love that explanation.
KATE: - the descriptions will end up on the tip via the surface.
Actually, when you move the tip,
and when you hit something, more electrons will be tunnelled through the tip.
And that will give you an idea of ​​how close the surface is.
TOM: But that means you need a point with a width of one atom.
KATE: It means that the point must be very narrow.
TOM: Okay, here you come into the story.
ANDY: So, I'm going to show you how to make a point with a thickness of one atom.
It must be as sharp as possible to obtain a good image.
We have a secret nanoscience weapon:
Pliers. And cutting pliers.
TOM: I already thought that there was something
terrible expensive equipment was needed, but ...
ANDY: I have some platinum wire here.
TOM: OK, that's terribly expensive.
ANDY: It is a platinum iridium alloy.
And we use platinum so that it does not conduct oxygen
which would make the point thicker.
Because we want a single, conductive atom on the surface of the point.
So, if I hold this wire with my pliers
and I cut the wire at a 45-degree angle ...
... voilà!
That means you have something that is - in theory - atomic screen.
TOM: That's fantastic! So what do if it is not conductive?
Because quantum tunneling only works with something that is conductive.
KATE: This is an atomic force microscope.
TOM: That's really cool! And is it really scanning now?
KATE: Indeed. You can see it here on the screen, that is - 20 micrometer diameter.
That is a fifth of the width of your hair, Tom.
But we would not be able to see anything here
if it was not against a flat, high-contrast background.
Fortunately, we have a number of minerals that are supplied in user-friendly flat sheets.
One of these sheets is mica, which I have here.
But we can not be sure that we only have a single layer on the surface.
So that's why we have another high-tech, nanoscientific tool.
TOM: Adhesive tape.
KATE: Yes.
Stick this.
And it holds just one of these layers of mica, or a pair.
TOM: Only the top layers?
KATE: Yes.
And then: peel it off, and can you see the vague outline?
TOM: There it is. There is a vague outline of a square.
Is that - is that a layer of mica of just one atom thick?
KATE: Japanese. And that implies that what is left is also completely flat.
This gives us a very good contrast for any atom, molecule, species -
these are a few fibers on the top of this surface -
what we will look at and see what use they can have for us.
TOM: So here we have a million pounds of equipment in this lab.
And then we have tongs and tape.
ANDY: Yes.
TOM: That's incredible. Kate Oliver, Andy Collins,
from the Faculty of Functional Nanomaterials at the University of Bristol.
Thank you very much!
Translation: Brecht Lauwers